[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway. Tracy, one of the
things that I think we like [music] to
do on this podcast is sort of deabstract
the things that we take for granted in
the world. And there are various
processes. We always say this when
there's like a blowup or something like
that where it's like, oh, if we're
having to pay attention to X or Y, there
must be something going on. But we don't
always have to wait for blow-ups. But
like we live in this world where like
you click buttons and things happen and
you have some intuition of what happens
after the button is clicked, but you
don't really have a great intuition of
like what happens between the button
clicking and the thing happening.
>> Absolutely. I actually don't know how
the process of like inputting an
equities trade actually works like where
it kind of shows up. So that's a big
question. And I suspect a lot of people,
even people who are in markets, probably
don't know like the entire sequence of
events. Partly because it's gotten more
complicated over the years with like
reggg NMS. Do you remember that and
stuff like that?
>> The other thing I've been realizing
about trading, obviously the big trend
here is high frequency trading, right?
And it's just getting faster and faster
and faster. When we first started
writing about HFT, I guess in the sort
of like mid 2000s after the financial
crisis,
>> I remember thinking that it was all
about the actual algorithm and finding
[clears throat] like a really smart
pattern in financial markets to exploit.
But the more I learn about it and the
more I read about it, I kind of realize
it's not really that. It's about
exploiting the market structure.
[snorts]
>> Yeah. Yeah. Totally. And there are so
many, you know, we we had that I forget
who we were talking to recently. Oh, it
was the guy from Hudson River trading
and you know, there were the famous like
wire wars where it's like, no, I want to
be one inch closer to the main server,
etc. It's like, god, this is like a good
use of brain power. So, like we're going
to solve the market because one more
nancond
faster, etc. But, you know, the other
thing, you know, sort of related to
this, one of my long-standing questions
is, you know, a jobs report will drop at
8:30 on a Friday and the market
immediately moves. And I'm like, how did
that happen? Because it didn't happen
because someone was staring, they had
their like fingers above the buy or the
sell button, but also had something had
to be programmed such that that data
could instantly be ingested and then
some sort of like directional trade was
made based on that. But I don't know how
that happens. I don't know how that
works. There's also of course the
overall question of what all this
electronic trading actually means for
the market itself.
>> Yes.
>> And people talk about things you know
with the multistrat funds getting these
feedback loops and maybe increasing
volatility in the market and things like
that. So we should discuss
>> and I would just add one more thing. You
say what does it mean for the market
itself? What does it mean for society
itself that so much effort is being
placed on like getting a meter closer to
the server room or whatever and why is
this a good use of time and is this
improved capital allocation? I'm really
excited to say we do in fact have I
think truly the perfect guest to talk
about this someone who has a sort of an
extraordinary body of life's work in a
range of areas that is very distinct
from almost any other academic or
researcher that I can think of. We're
going to be speaking with Donald
McKenzie. He's a professor of sociology
at the University of Edinburgh in
Scotland. I first came across his work.
He wrote a fantastic book called An
Engine Not a Camera, which is sort of
about finance and the original birth of
quantitative finance and the use of
advanced models and how these models
didn't just reflect what was going on in
the real world, but how the adoption of
these models then created this feedback
loop, the engine effect such that it
actually started to drive markets
themselves. More recently, he wrote a
book called Trading at the Speed of
Light, all about highfrequency trading.
He's also written recently a book about
digital advertising. And so truly a a
polymath in the world of thinking about
this relationship between industry and
the sort of technological substrates
that drive them. Professor McKenzie,
thank you so much for coming on
OddLotss.
>> Well, thank you very much for inviting
me to do that.
>> Absolutely. Why don't you start off by
telling us the gestalt of your life
work? What is your core underlying
interest such that it's produced books
in these various realms?
>> Yeah, I mean fundamentally I'm a
sociologist of technology. So I'm
interested in the technical systems that
affect or could affect all of us you
know so over time uh first major project
in that area was on nuclear missile
guidance technology.
>> Amazing. [clears throat] Then I moved on
to safety critical computing technology.
Then the work on financial models that
you've just mentioned.
Then high frequency trading. Then
digital advertising,
you know, because as well as driving us
all insane by or ads that we don't want
to see appearing on our screens, that's
also of course the big funding source
for much of the everyday digital world.
And then most recently of all I've
started working on AI and large language
models. So you can see that you can see
the picture. They're all highly
technical areas. One way or the other
they all affect all of us.
>> The other reason we wanted to talk to
you is because you come at everything
from this sociological perspective and I
absolutely love it when like
anthropologists and sociologists go to
Wall Street and write about it. Why did
you take that approach especially with
your highfrequency trading book?
>> Yeah. Well, I don't do kind of like
quantitative
social science, you know, I can leave
that for example as far as markets are
concerned. I leave that to economists.
What I do I like talking to people. I
like going looking at stuff to the
extent that you can look at it. I like
tracing how things have developed
through time. you know, my work's often
got a kind of, you know, something of a
historical dimension to it. But the most
fun bit isn't writing the books. The
most fun bit is talking to people. And
that's the bit I've always enjoyed most.
>> One interesting thing in this book, Joe,
I don't know if you noticed, but Donald
writes down like all his numbers of
sources and who they are. So like, you
know, people from the exchange, people
from high frequency trading firms, what
their seniority is, which is something I
hadn't really seen before. That is a
really cool thing. By the way, as Donald
says, the fun part is talking to people,
not so much the writing of the book. As
two people who talk to people every day
and have never written the book, I feel
already, now granted, we never actually
went through the process of writing the
book because the talking part is so much
more fun. I don't want to ever take a
pause from the talking. So, I already
feel like to some extent, Donald is a
kindred spirit. It's like it's fun to
talk to people, isn't it? Talk to us
about how you find them. you know, it's
like, okay, HFT is interesting to you
and like you just want to have some
conversations. What is the sociologist's
toolkit here for knowing who to talk to?
>> Yeah. Well, it's always difficult and
it's always very ad hoc. There's always
a lot of luck involved in it. And with a
financial market topic, I will typically
start reading the Financial Times,
finding names in the Financial Times,
approaching those people, and then maybe
they pass me on to other people. But,
you know, there's also, as I said, dumb
luck involved. like crucial moment in
the work I did in high frequency trading
was going to interview someone at the
start of it and framed on his wall was
the front cover of an issue of Forbes
with the headline of the article free
enterprise comes to Wall Street and I
thought oh that sounds kind of
interesting and I checked that out and
it was to do with a new electronic stock
exchange called Ireland
And it turned out that Ireland the story
of Ireland was completely interwoven
with the story of of high frequency
trading.
>> Before we get into exactly what high
frequency trading is and how it fits
into, you know, placing orders for
equities or futures or bonds, I have a
cultural question which is whenever you
go into an HFT firm's office, it always
looks like a tech company. Yeah. Right.
with the chess board and the mach
and very modern like why do you think
they've taken that approach? How did
that aesthetic become the norm?
>> Yeah, that's a really good indicator of
cultural change because of course
previous to that the sort of dominant
image we might have of a financial
market would be the trading floor of the
New York Stock Exchange. You know, folks
in colored jackets. They're typically
televised when even nowadays when you
know so there's been a a big drop in the
market or something so the the camera
has tried to catch somebody who's
looking kind of glum and and worried. So
we think of that as what finance is.
>> Or we think about like the Bud Fox in
Wall Street of a bunch of guys and slick
back hair sort of, you know, on the
phone and boiler. Yeah. Yelling at each
other looking at a green screen, right?
Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt that,
but those are I suspect the two things
people imagine.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And you know there's was a
transition involved but by and large the
high frequency trading firms hire people
who know how to code often [snorts]
you know with higher degrees in
mathematical kinds of subjects and even
the people who refer to themselves as
traders often have that kind of
background.
And you know, I'm I'm sure when the
visitor isn't there, there'll be a fair
bit of swearing at the screen when
something goes wrong and and that kind
of stuff. But you you're right that the
normal experience of those trading
rooms, they're quiet, they're orderly,
and you could indeed make mistake them
for a Silicon Valley startup.
>> Yeah. And if you see people in jeans and
I I visited one and like I think I saw
the CEO and he was just like wearing his
like college t-shirt or uh something
like that.
>> Yeah. With strong memory I've got
because you know in the previous work
they work for an engine not a camera and
some follow on stuff. I would often go
to investment banks and in investment
banks you know I kind of had to wear a
suit and a nice shirt and a a tie and so
on. So when I started interviewing in
high frequency trading, I turned up at
one firm dressed like that and the owner
of the firm sort of snarled at me.
You're overdressed.
>> Wow.
>> You mentioned Island. Why don't you tell
us that story? You know, I want to get
more into the tech, etc., but you're
like, okay, this turned out to be an
exchange. What was distinct? What is
Island? I've heard of it, but it's again
one of these things that I've heard of
it and then I moved on. What was
distinct about this and why is it so
interwoven into the history of HFT? How
is it different from other exchanges
that have existed for hundreds of years?
>> Yeah. Yeah. You know, I'm going to
oversimplify of course because there
were predecessors to Ireland that you
know were a little bit like it and so
on, but that would take us too long to
go into. I mean, fundamentally, trading
on Ireland was organized around an
electronic order book, which was is a
list of all the bids to buy or offers to
sell the shares in question. And that
electronic order book is managed by
something called a matching engine. And
as the name implies, that looks for a
match. In other words, a bid to buy and
an offer to sell at the same price. And
when it finds that couple, it
consummates the trade and the trade is
done. So it's all done electronically.
There's no direct human negotiation
involved. You just enter your orders
into the order book and the matching
engine either executes them or fails to
find a match. There were exchanges prior
to Ireland that worked in that kind of
way. But what was distinctive about
Ireland is that its matching engine was
blisteringly fast by the standards of
the day which were the you know was
essentially the late 1990s. So the
closest analog was a system called
instant and it might take a couple of
seconds the matching engine to find the
match and execute the trade. And of
course for a human being sitting there
even if they're impatient 2 seconds is
not a very long time. Island improved on
that a thousandfold. So it could execute
trades in 2 milliseconds 2000th of a
second. So that was the opening for
highfrequency trading that with exchange
I mean strictly Ireland was not exchange
it was what was called an electronic
communications network or ECN but I'll
call it an exchange for simplicity. If
you've got an exchange like that and
you've got an automated trading system
it's a marriage made in heaven. The two
things the exchange and the trading firm
fit each other very very well and
amongst the consequences of that is that
liquidity in Ireland. It traded NASDAQ
stocks. This is the time of the dotcom
bubble of course where there's a lot of
trading of NASDAQ tech stocks. Ireland
brought a lot of liquidity to that
market. So that's you get a kind of
feedback loop where you get automated
trading
bringing liquidity to exchanges that
have the kind of technical features that
make high frequency trading attractive
and feasible. So the established
exchanges started to have to change how
they did things because otherwise they
were going to lose out to the new
exchanges. And that's basically the
feedback loop that's created today's
electronic markets.
[music]
>> Joe, whenever I hear terms like
millisecond and nancond, I just it's so
hard to wrap my head around what that
actually it's. It's faster than that.
>> Oh, yeah. For [laughter] sure.
>> Donald,
>> I I can actually help there. And I'm
going to hold my fingers. I'm holding
them 30 cm apart or since you're in the
US, I'll say one foot [laughter] apart
at the speed of light in a vacuum. It
takes a nancond to get from one finger
to the other finger. And that's an
indication of how fast automated trading
specifically high frequency trading has
become. That when I started working on
the topic in roughly 2011, people were
still talking about milliseconds or
thousands of a second. Two or three
years later, it had become microsconds
or millionth of a second. And by the
time Ed was finishing the research,
nanconds
were starting to account. So light
traveling that 30 cm traveling that foot
that mattered to high frequency trading
by you know roughly 2018 2019 2020 round
about then
>> that's very helpful. I do have questions
about the physical realities of how fast
we can actually go with all this stuff.
But before we go any further, can you
talk about the process of let's just
focus on the equity market for now.
Someone places an order to buy or sell a
stock. What actually happens in the
ecosystem between traders and market
makers and the exchange that makes that
happen and what does it mean to actually
make that happen and execute the trade?
So what happens is your order via the
broker your user I mean in the brokerage
system is no longer a human being via
the brokerage system gets placed in the
exchanges
order book and then one of two things
happens. The first is if the matching
engine can find an existing order in the
order book that matches the the price of
your order, it executes the trade and
the the trade then happens, not quite
instantly, but you know, very very very
fast and you're done. You're that's it.
It's over. If on the other hand there is
no match as the order book stands your
order rests in the order book and it
stays there until either you cancel it
or a matching order comes along and then
it's executed at that point. So that's
the basic process
>> you know so it occurs to me like gains
of speed in trading have been happening
forever long before we were talking
about you know anything electronic I'm
sure yeah other technologies exist
technological evolution is a long time
thing is pretty benol statement I
suppose but what I'm curious about is
the sense in which a change in degree
becomes a change in kind essentially so
that like when you go from 1 second to a
thousandth of a second to a nancond. How
does that change say like the types of
strategies that can then be employed or
the types of skills that might be
required to be a successful trader in
the nancond era versus the 1 second era
like talk to us about like that
relationship.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's a wonderful
book by the historian of technology Jima
Canales which is called a tenth of a
second a history and the significance of
the tenth of a second is that's the
generally accepted
lower threshold of the human
perceptibility
of time. You know, basically we just
can't mentally process time intervals
that are less.
>> So Tracy, don't feel bad about not being
able to build an intuition for a
nancond. [laughter] I don't
>> less than a tenth of a second, you know.
So what essentially happened is that
we've moved from that kind of you know
the tenth of a second or longer from
from that kind of epoch into an epoch
where human beings I mean they can still
be in overall control of the system but
they can't actually execute the actual
trading decisions fast enough not
[snorts] to be outrun done by an
algorithm. So we moved from a a kind of
human- centered form of trading to a
machine centered form of trading and the
you know the actual threshold of the
change is probably around that tenth of
a second amount. I have another cultural
and I guess market structure question.
But one thing that I always thought was
interesting about high frequency trading
was that the banks didn't really get
into it which you know
>> there's one big reason why which is the
ban on prop trading after 2008 but even
before then they just never seemed to be
able to compete with independent firms.
Why did that happen? Yeah, it's I've
asked people that and there's I think
complex sorts of reasons and I let it be
said some banks have been more
successful than others. Banks are not
always bad at this though most banks are
bad at it. One way of thinking about it
is is that typically a bank will have an
IT department that's separate from the
other functions of the bank like trading
like market making and so on. So if you
you know if you're a trader you got to
persuade the IT people to give you a
fast enough system which involves them
you know maybe writing some new software
buying some new kit. So you need to get
higher level management sign off on it
and it all takes time whereas the high
frequency trading firms are typically
pretty small. you know 50 people is a
decent size firm. 150 people is you know
is a reasonably big high frequency
trading firm. Very often those firms are
owned and run by the you know the people
who founded them. So that there is a
boss or bosses but you know other than
that it's a relatively flat
organizational structure. If for
example, at least this was the case in
the early days of high frequency
trading, it's not quite as simple as
this now, but in the early days of high
frequency trading, you know, if some IT
firm came out with a new, better, faster
server and you were a trader in a firm
like that and you okay, well, let's get
this new server. You could just use your
own personal credit card to buy the
server, get it delivered to your office,
and then get your engineers to take it
out to whatever data center that they
were trading in and and get it installed
straight away. And you know, that could
maybe that would be a week or 10 days or
something. Whereas in the bank, you'd be
doing pretty well if you could achieve
that within 6 months.
>> Yeah,
>> that's amazing. Purchases,
>> we don't know. We don't know anything
about long waits for computers to
arrive. [laughter]
>> No, we surely don't. Um, that's sarcasm.
By the way, actually, this reminds me of
something that I wanted to ask, which is
we know there's competition between
firms, highfrequency traders for the
fastest connections to um, exchanges and
things like that. There's also
competition I imagine within the firm
itself because setting aside the credit
card anecdote these can be expensive and
there's also limited supply you know
only so many servers can be colllocated
where they want to be
>> in your research how did you actually
find executives at HFT places how did
they actually allocate the fastest
connections to which team
>> yeah what I found was the high frequency
trading firms fell into two different
camps, so to speak. In some of them,
there were separate trading teams that
didn't really communicate with each
other and indeed by design didn't
communicate with each other. In some
cases, the the office was actually laid
out in such a way that somebody in one
team was not very likely accidentally to
overhear something said by someone in
the in another term. I mean in those in
those firms yes I mean they are
essentially in competition and
[clears throat] I think that in that
kind of firm then the results of each
trading desk the P&L the profit and loss
the little trading teams that are doing
best would get the available bandwidth
on the microwave links that are crucial
to high frequency trading and and so on
and maybe they would get the fastest
machines first and and so on so forth.
Earth. The other kind of trading firm
was and is operated as a unified entity
in some cases even without individual
profit and loss in individual P&L
accounts for traders and there's a lot
of shared infrastructure um in that kind
of firm and indeed there's also shared
infrastructure in this you know the
segregated kind of trading firm because
if you're the boss of such a firm
there's obviously simply economies in
not having completely separate IT
systems for each each trading for each
each trading team. But there's that kind
of divide. Does the firm operate as a
unified entity or does the firm operate
as a sort of aggregate of competing
trading teams? So actually let's just
you know on the subject of who is the
closest or where who gets to have their
server located where tell us a little
bit more about the timeline. So island
emerges in the late '9s. When did it
start to dawn on people in the trading
industry that given this new physical
reality given the speed we need to start
thinking about who is going to have
collocation. we need to start thinking
about sort of like microwave radio line
of sight. Where did that speed war was
the genesis of it? Yeah. Yeah. I mean a
kind of crucial date was 2005
where Ireland which had already been
bought by Instanet was acquired by
NASDAQ and the New York Stock Exchange
uh acquired another of the pioneering
electronic trading exchanges. This one
was called Archipelago. And
>> is that just a coincidence that island
and archipelago? That's kind of like
>> Yeah. No, I'm sure it's not a
coincidence. Yeah. And they
technologically reorganized themselves.
The New York Stock Exchange and NASDAQ
technologically reorganized themselves
around this new insurgent technological
approach to trading, so to speak. And
2005 because of the acquisitions in that
year is is a kind of noteworthy
year. But even before 2005,
people in trading firms started to
become aware that you couldn't just do
automated trading with the machine
sitting in your office. For example,
there's a Kansas City trading firm
called Tradebot whose owner Dave
Cummings has written a really rather
nice autobiography. And one of the
things that Cummings came to realize is
that trading an island while having your
machines in Kansas City was placing him
at a disadvantage. So firms like that
started to move their machines either
directly into the island computer room
or they couldn't do that into the
offices of another firm in the building
to shorten the distance and that kind of
thing was already in place by 2005.
Two things then happened for a period.
There was a kind of wild west so to
speak where there are lots of stories of
high frequency traders like drilling
holes in walls so as to shorten the
distance between their servers and the
exchanges matching engines. That has by
and large generally come to an end. What
happens now in the in the data centers
of all the major exchanges is there is a
rule about equal cable length. So if you
happen to have if a trading firm happens
to have its servers physically close to
the exchange matching engines, the fiber
optic cable that connects them is coiled
so that there's exactly the same cable
length for each of the trading firms
within that data center. The other thing
that started to happen is that getting
the signal from one exchange's data
center to another exchanges data center
started to become a technological
speed race. Back to 2005,
by and large it would just be sent by
fiber optic cable, but the exact route
was not under the control of the
exchanges or of the trading firms. So
there's a lot of sort of randomness.
The crucial link here is actually
between the Chicago Merkantile Exchanges
data center then um in downtown Chicago.
It's it's now in in in the suburbs of
Chicago. The link between that and the
data centers that trade shares in
northern New Jersey. And there was a
kind of triple evolution there. The
first evolution was that the particular
trading firm, and since it's no longer
directly in business, I can actually
name it Gecko, um, managed to, as it
were, stitch together existing fiber
optic cables to get the fastest route on
the Chicago, New Jersey link. And that
actually in the business was known as
the gold line. gold because of the money
that you could make by having the
fastest route. Then in 2010, if memory
serves me right, a new firm, Spread
Networks, actually dug an entire new
cable from Chicago to Northern New
Jersey. Uh, you know, drilling, you
know, sort of underneath car parks and,
you know, just really trying to be as
close to what a geographer would call
the geodisic. In other words, the the
fastest route on the surface of the
earth from point A to point B. Then
third phase that was trumped by the
arrival of microwave because light in a
fiber optic cable I mean the core of
fiber optic cable is essentially a
specialized form of glass and that glass
slows the light down to only 2/3 of its
speed in a vacuum. Whereas if you can
shoot your electromagnetic signal
through the atmosphere, it's not exactly
at the speed of light in the in a
vacuum, but it's very very close to the
speed of light in a vacuum. So that was
the third phase when people moved from
exclusive use of fiber optic cable to
supplementing the fiber optic cable by
microwave links between Chicago and
northern New Jersey.
>> That was incredible.
>> [music]
[music]
>> I have another cultural market structure
question which is along with this
intense competition to be faster than
anyone else there was a narrative
around that time that this was a bad
thing Right. Um, and one of the
interesting cultural things is you saw
the highfrequency trading firms kind of
divide themselves into good guys and bad
guys. So there were some that were
saying, [clears throat] "Well, we make
liquidity, right? We're good for the
market." And then there were others,
>> I mean, they wouldn't describe
themselves this way, but they were
accused of being liquidity takers
>> in the market. How should we think about
that particular tension?
>> Yeah. No, that's a very fundamental
thing because you're quite right that
there's a degree of differentiation
between trading firms and indeed in the
more segregated firms also within those
firms you different desks fall on others
on different sides of that. I mean the
the way to think about it is to remember
that in all these exchanges trading is
organized around an electronic order
book. As I said, a list of the bids to
buy and offers to sell the instrument in
question. What a market making firm does
is it places lots of orders into the
order book at prices that can't
immediately be executed, but those
orders then populate the order book. So
if somebody else comes along, an
individual investor or maybe an asset
management firm, somebody else comes
along and needs to trade, they find an
order book that's populated with lots of
existing bids and offers that they can
execute against. So the market making
firm is providing liquidity
and most people reckon that that's a
good thing. The other kind of firm, the
one where, as you say, there tends to be
more controversy, they don't do that.
They don't constantly populate the order
book. Their systems constantly monitor
the order book. And then when they
detect what they think is a profitable
opportunity,
they execute against the orders that are
already in the order book. And that is
called liquidity taking because of
course the execution removes the order
from the order book. And in in practice,
a lot of this is actually going on
between high frequency trading firms
because most of the orders in the order
book are placed by market making high
frequency trading firms. And a lot of
the executions against those are by the
high frequency trading firms that
specialize in taking
liquidity.
And this is the core of what gives the
business its characteristic as an arms
race in speed. So for imagine for a
moment that your algorithms are trading
equities in one of the data centers in
northern New Jersey and the relevant
stock index future traded in Chicago
changes in price or even you know
there's a big shift in the order book
for that stock index future and then
let's say the price of the stock index
future falls
that's very likely to lead within a tiny
fraction of a second to falls in the
price of the underlying shares being
traded in New Jersey. And in that tiny
little fraction of a second in that
intervening period, a lot of the market
making firms orders in those order books
become stale as people in the markets
would put them. So the making firms
rush to try to cancel their stale orders
and the taking firms race to execute
against those stale orders. And that's a
race that nowadays can literally be
played out in nanoseconds.
>> That's interesting. I hadn't appreciated
that dynamic at all to be honest. You
mentioned that these highfrequency
trading firms, they're all sort of like
they're run and operated basically by
the employees or the owner or something
like that. What is it that sort of
distinguishes a highfrequency trading
firm from say a hedge fund that would
have limited partners and make
distributions etc. [snorts] You know,
you never hear about like oh I have an
investment with Jane Street or something
like that. They I don't think that's
what I think. What is it about the
nature of the business such that
essentially they trade their own
capital?
>> Yeah, I guess that's just you know in a
sense it's one of those things that's
historical evolution. I mean in many
cases those high frequency trading firms
were initially set up by successful
floor traders particularly floor traders
in the Chicago markets the futures
markets and if you were successful in
that you could you might not become a
billionaire but you know you could make
decent amount of money tens of millions
of dollars and that was enough to enable
you to start an initially small
automated trading firm and you often
didn't need any external capital to do
it. You just had to buy the necessary
technical kit and hire technically savvy
people and so on. But you could start
really quite small. You could start, you
know, 10erson firm or something like
that. Now the business has got a lot
more expensive since then because in
good part of the speed race that we've
just been talking about but by and large
those firms made profits the owners
reinvested the profits in the firms so
that you know the the capabilities of
the firms grew to meet the growing
demands on them. And then another thing
that should perhaps be said is that
those founders would have the majority
of their net worth invested in the firm.
And so their risk control was often, you
know, pretty good. You know, risk
management for those firms was not a
sort of, you know, a separate
bureaucratic department that the traders
had to try to outwit, so to speak. the
founder would quickly detect if you were
trying to do something like that. Now,
some automated trading firms have blown
up ne nevertheless, but it's actually
quite interesting how few of them have
blown up.
>> Yeah. because of you know for example
because of classical software bugs and
that's I think because the relatively
small structure the handson involvement
of the founders etc etc has created a
kind of
technical culture that actually works
pretty reasonably well better than I
would have expected it to work at the
start of this research
>> so one thing I wanted to ask is this
idea of physical limitations to how fast
we can actually go. I'm pretty sure
people always say that you can't go
faster than the speed of light. There's
probably some caveats there about like
quantum entanglement and stuff like
that, but surely we must be getting
close to how fast things can actually
go. What's your sense of how long the
speed race can continue?
>> Yeah. Well, we can never get to zero.
>> Mhm. Of course, I think Einstein is
basically correct. You can't get faster
than the um the speed of light in a in a
vacuum.
And similarly, a computer system,
there's always going to be a nonzero
processing time of the system, but you
can get ever ever closer to that. So in
mathematics speak, zero is an asmtopical
limit. Um that's to say you can always
get closer to it, but you're never
actually going to get right there. And I
think that's the nature of the business.
You know, we're still in the nancond
regime. If I remember correctly, the
next lowest time interval is the
picoscond. um you know we I could
imagine this continuing in a in a domain
of picos seconds. So that's the way I
would see it that there's a hard limit
but we're never actually going to get to
the hard limit. We're still going to
race to get as close as possible.
>> But your understanding as of the time of
your work is that the race is not over.
that for these firms and I'm sure they
have many different projects on their
plate including various things with AI
which we haven't gotten to and I guess
we won't but the speed race is not and
will never be done.
>> Yeah, I think that's correct. Now, of
course, there is an economic process,
>> yeah,
>> at work here, which is to say that the
investments that you make in speed
have to be recoupable from the trading
profits that you make from your trading.
And I think Tracy I think said at the
very beginning what essentially is going
on here is that structural features of
financial markets are being exploited
like the relationship between the stock
index future and the underlying
equities. The amount of money to be made
by exploiting those kind of structural
features is not trivial.
It's been nicely measured by the um
Chicago economist Eric Suffort and
colleagues. It's not trivial, but it's
perhaps singledigit billions of [snorts]
dollars. So, you know, suddenly deciding
you're going to invest $50 billion in
the technology of speed would be a dumb
>> thing to do because you wouldn't be able
to recoup it. So there is that economic
factor that is I'm pretty certain
slowing you know the speed race is still
there but it's it's you know and you
know things are getting faster but the
rate at which they're getting faster is
certainly not accelerating and I think
that economic factor probably explains
it.
>> That makes sense. So, we should talk
about the impact of HFT on the overall
market a little bit more. And one of the
things that caught my eye in your book
was you cite a previous study, I can't
remember by who, but basically saying
that the efficiency of financial markets
has not improved between the 1880s and
2012,
>> which is very counterint.
But what does that mean? Yeah.
>> Yeah. So that is work by Thomas Filipon
or his French pronounce it in the
American way. It's Thomas Filipon. What
he means by efficiency there is really
rather different from what I've been
talking about. What he means by
efficiency is what he calls the unit
cost of financial intermediation
which essentially is you know basically
putting it crudely how much it costs to
do the kind of thing that investors want
to do that asset managers want to do and
so on and it you know it's very striking
finding that from the 1880s to I think
his most recent data got up to 2015
that there was no really clear-cut
tendency for that cost to decline
despite [snorts] all the advances in
information and communication
technologies over those many decades.
And the explanation to put it
simplistically and crudely
is the capture of those efficiency gains
in the form of high pay in the financial
sector. You know, typically through the
form of fees. So the fees that you pay
for an index fund, say for example,
those have really gone down. But people
have also been moving their money into
private equity and the like hedge funds
which have much higher fees and so on.
So those kind of effects seem to have
sort of canceled themselves out in the
1940s.
A professional in finance was basically
paid roughly the same as somebody with
equivalent educational qualifications in
a different line of business. And then
from the 1970s onwards the gap has got
bigger and bigger and bigger. Now these
days of course you can make a lot of
money by being a technologist in AI for
example but by and large those sort of
exceptions aside
finance is an extraordinarily
well-paying professional at least for
those in the central roles in it. And
that's essentially the explanation of of
that finding by Philippon.
>> Well, this is a good opportunity to ask
about AI because I suppose it's
inevitable as a sociologist who examines
the tech industry or looks at how tech
is impacting things. Your next project
must be AI, right?
>> Yes, it is.
>> And what's what's the particular angle
or what have you been discovering so
far? Yeah, it's very early days. But the
thing I'm most interested in so far is
the question of scaling
a I because of course it's no secret to
anybody who reads reads a newspaper
subscribes to Bloomberg or or whatever.
I mean the huge trillions of dollars are
being thrown at AI infrastructure and
absolutely there is a sort of logic
there that's you know repeatedly stated
that you know these systems are all
built around neural networks and the
effectiveness of a neural network grows
with the size of the network the size of
the training data the number of
parameters in the model and so on and
there are well-known scaling laws but
and this is the thing that interests me
is the the but there's a very nice
little statement from Sam Alman in
February of last year that the
intelligence of a system is roughly the
log the logarithm in other words of the
resources devoted to training it running
it to computation at inference time and
so on. Now, of course, what Alman meant
was basically give the industry more
money and you'll get more intelligence.
And that's of course indeed the giving
the more money to the industry is
exactly what what's going on. But a
logarithmic function, there's a bit of
maths here, a logarithmic function, at
least of the kind that Altman is
referring to, [snorts] is a diminishing
returns function. You can draw its graph
and it very clearly demonstrates
diminishing returns. It'll you can
always get better and better, but each
increment costs you more in terms of the
resources deployed. And we're dealing
here where the horizontal axis in the
graph so to speak is denominated
in trillions of dollars of financial
input or hundreds of megat tons of
carbon dioxide emitted by the
electricity generation needed to power
the data center. So
the question becomes on a diminishing
returns curve
how far do you go? When do you decide we
really got to stop? Can you decide we
really got to stop? Do you have kind of
quasi magical beliefs so to speak that
at some point the diminishing returns
something qualitative will happen that
artificial general intelligence or super
intelligence will suddenly appear? So
that's the core of what I'm interested
in um right now. How far do you go along
a diminishing returns curve?
>> Joe, I just want to state for the record
if you give me more money I get more
intelligent. There's no diminishing
returns just for the record,
>> you know. Um,
noted first of all, and it's
interesting, you know, hearing this in
the context and it suddenly makes so
much sense how this fits into your work
and this idea of like the arms race,
right? Because yes, it's true like maybe
there's only so much extra profit
available for the firm and maybe that
pool of profit is shrinking and maybe it
gets more and more costly to sort of
exploit the remaining profit that's
available. But on the other hand, you
can't fall behind. You can't let and
this is so there it's true in HFT and
it's clearly true in AI where okay like
it spends more and more money to improve
the model
>> but you can't fall behind even if the
economics look worse with each
iteration. Anyway, Professor McKenzie,
lovely conversation. I really enjoyed
that. We really learned a lot. Really
appreciate you coming on to OddLots and
uh yeah, [music] thank you for
>> Thank you both. Thank you both for
inviting me like I said and you know
thanks for a a really great
conversation.
>> It was fantastic. Thank you.
>> We'll have to have you back on when you
publish your AI book.
>> Absolutely.
[music]
Tracy, I love that conversation. Really
interesting. I love like encountering
people who are like actually understand
the tech, actually can articulate what
the tech is doing for especially it's
always impressive someone with a
sociology background to just sort of be
like that comfortable and I think that's
like the throughine of his work is like
he gets it
>> right. So in the book there's lots of
like field trips to data centers and
looking at cables and things like that
but then also as you stated just talking
to people and getting anecdotes and
there's funny stories about like
>> the battle of the asterisks and things
like that that's at the very end but
people should go and read it. The other
thing that stood out to me from that
conversation was towards the end when we
discussed AI, you made the point that
you get this similar dynamic between HFT
and AI now where because everything is
framed
>> as existential.
>> Uh you just can't stop, right? You
always have to keep going.
>> Totally. And look, I mean, I suppose the
high frequency trading is not sort of
like existential in the broad sense, but
it's existential at the firm level. At
the firm. Yeah. Yeah. at the firm level.
So it's like and I hadn't really thought
about okay you like have this like pool
of theoretical profit which is the gap
between where the futures are trading in
Chicago and where the stocks are trading
in New York that's fixed right there
that's not going to get that big but
again like someone gets faster at
exploiting that and I had never really
heard quite until your question and his
answer this sort of make taker dynamic
of okay I have these orders and now I'm
quickly rushing to cancel them and
you're quickly rushing to fulfill them
and if you and I are both in the market
we can't slow if you get faster I must
get faster cuz you're going to then
snipe me every time or vice versa etc.
But, you know, they still make a lot of
money. It seems like unlike the AI
firms, they make a lot of money. Yeah,
exactly.
>> That was a funny dynamic in HFT world,
the like accusations of Taker versus
Maker. And I always think of the, you
know, the Spider-Man meme where they're
all kind of pointing at each other. It
felt very much like that. But it was
really great to catch up on HFT again.
This was sort of a blast from the past
because you used to hear about it more
and now it's become so normalized that
people just don't talk about it that
much. Well, you know, we heard about it
a lot and especially post 2008. Yeah.
That was the ultimate fingerpointing
era, right? The Michael Lewis because
you just have like everyone had some,
oh, it's the naked short sellers, it's
the credit rating agency, it's the uh,
you know, the law that forces banks to
be equitable in who they distribute
mortgages to, etc. Like, there was a
million fingerpointing. Oh, maybe it's
the HFT firms, maybe it's the short
sellers, whatever. So I mean part of the
reason we don't hear about it as much is
because there hasn't been a crisis etc.
But as you said the race continues and
of various flavors.
>> You can never get to zero but you can
always get closer.
>> You know it's like you know I always
think about some lines they go like
straight up you know it's like the they
ever like curve back around instead. You
get like negative space like can we do
even better than line go up like line go
up and backwards? I guess Einstein would
say no. Um, if only we could have
Einstein on as a guest to talk about
trading
>> to talk about high frequency trading.
[laughter]
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> That would be a perfect guest. Let's
leave it there.
>> All right. This has been another episode
of the OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway. You can follow me at Tracee
Alaway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Check out Donald
McKenzie's book, Trading at the Speed of
Light. And of course, follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez at Kerman,
Dashel Bennett at Dashbot, and Kell
Brooks at Kellbrooks. And for more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 247 in our Discord.
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when [music] we look back at the HFT
boom and how it continues, I guess, then
please [music] leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes [music] absolutely
adree. All you need to do is find the
Bloomberg channel on Apple Podcast and
follow the instructions there. Thanks
for listening.
[music]
>> [music]